The Ferrestans, who call themselves the Lanôsta, live in the mountains of the island of Ferrest and its surrounding islands. They also live on some of the islands on the west side of Srokeskia, as well as some places in the Porbotjo Mountains in eastern Srokeskia, and in other parts of the world to which they have migrated to in small numbers. The chief concern of this document is to describe their way of life in their native lands in Srokeskia, where they practice agriculture and animal husbandry in the mountains. The Island of Ferrest is about two thirds the size of Vancouver Island, but the mountains on Ferrest are higher and steeper. In addition, Ferrest has a few outlying islands, but many of those are inhabited chiefly by the Dzemali. Lanôsta appears to be a name the Ferrestans not only apply to themselves, but also a a group of related peoples on the mainland. They consider their ethnicity to be Lanôsta, but their tribal allegiance is to Ferrest, and their language is not fully mutually intelligible with those of their relatives.

Ferrestans grow crops of wheat, komos, barley, and rye chiefly on terraced fields on the slopes of mountain valleys. Occasionally, they till flat ground near the sea, or at the bottom of valleys, but due to their long history of wars with neighboring peoples and with themselves, Ferrestans usually prefer to make their homes in more inaccessible, defensible locations. Lower lying areas are left to be inhabited by the Dzemali, Mamkoslavs, or more recent settlers, but are often left as virgin forest, sometimes altered by the building of low walls or the felling of trees to make them more difficult to traverse. Fields are tilled with hoes or plows where there is space. Sowing time is in mid to late spring, and harvest is in the early fall.

Ferrestans keep herds of sheep, goat, lamini camelids, domesticated deer, horses, and cattle. Although their herds are not the largest, they are well pastured. Ferrestans commonly clear patches of forest to pasture their herds on in the winter, and to collect hay from, but the bulk of the food for their herds come from the lush alpine and subalpine pastures in the mountains. Often, a portion of a given clan will migrate to a summer village or temporary habitation higher in the mountains to graze the herds. In the driest intermontane valleys, such as Bawodjek ad Brenna, groups of Ferrestans live even more seminomadically. Some clans of Ferrestans do not have summer villages at all, as their villages are in a location close enough to the high pastures. Many, especially those along the sea, do have a summer village a portion of the clan migrates to during the warm months of the year.

Ferrestans supplement their diet with hunting, fishing, and gathering. They set traps, both snares and pits, along trails used by animals. These traps receive a more limited use than hunting with bows and spears, as with them it is harder to control what is caught and how much. Traps see increased use in hard times. For gathering, they gather nuts, herbs, berries, seeds, honey, and roots. Some roots, barks, leaves, and other things have medicinal purposes. Fishing is done both in rivers, lakes, and the sea. Whales are sometimes hunted.

Ferrestans use multiple kinds of watercraft. For traversing the small lakes and rivers of the mountains, they build bark canoes that can easily be carried from one place to another. For short journeys into the sea, or for journeys not using that many people or supplies, outrigger canoes are often used, although multihulled single-hulled ones are seen as well. These are usually made of wood plants, but sometimes smaller ones are dugout. For long journeys, or journeys involving many people or goods, full sized ships are used. Sometimes, these ships have outrigger poles on the side, but usually they do not. Double hulled canoes are used to transport goods or animals, usually towed behind a ship, but sometimes operating independently. In the early days of the Ferrestan people, they all lived by the sea. Even though this is no longer the case, a large percentage of them still live not far from it, and their language is saturated with oceanic metaphors, idioms, and imagery.

They build houses both out of wood and stone. Usually they do not use any mortar, but build in the fashion the Incas did. They utilize a sort of folding wood paneling to divide rooms and provide the walls for temporary structures and dwellings. Villages are often built on a flat portion or ledge of a mountain slope. This ledge is enlarged by digging out a portion of the neighboring slope, creating a ditch between the village and and the rest of the mountain to divert avalanches. The dirt is piled up next to the ditch on the village side, to make the avalanche diversion more effective. Sometimes, retaining walls of stone and further piled earth are used to further raise the village, or widen the ledge. This is especially seen in older villages that have been occupied for a long time. Villages usually have walls on one or more sides, made of stone, earthworks, or wood. The older the village, the more likely it is to have more walls of more durable material, even if it is only around a core portion of the village. Usually, the first stone buildings to be built in a village would be a tower or keep, a fortification the population can take refuge in, or a church, if the village is inhabited by christians. After that, granaries, houses, and walls may also be built out of stone.

Most villages date from the 1600s or 1700s. Before that time, from the late 1500s to late 1600s, Ferrest was plunged into a great civil war that few villages survived intact. Often, villages were rebuilt on top of the ruins of the destroyed village, with materials from the old village either flattened out to provide a foundation for the new village or recycled into new buildings. Not even Cernit survived the war intact, being reduced to a small village until the King of Ferrest rebuilt it in 1724, commanding each clan to have 3 families in the town at once, and inviting Mamkoslav and Bengali merchants to build and inhabit the town. The town of Ferrest, likewise, was burnt to the ground in 1609, and though it was soon rebuilt, it did not recover its prewar population until the 1960s.

A clan is a large family unit descended from a common ancestor. It can number between about 150-1000, though they chiefly are within the low hundreds. Usually, a clan will have one main village, a summer village or two, and few outlying hamlets and homesteads within the same valley. Some of the larger clans have multiple villages, some of the smallest have only one. Clans also typically have members who live in cities, towns, or abroad, who do not live with the rest of their clan. Sometimes, if a clan grows too small or too large, it will split, or join with another clan with a common ancestor, with mutual consent and the assent of the king of Ferrest. The last time this happened was in 1946, when two clans that had been decimated by recent warfare chose to merge. The last time this happened on a slightly wider scale was after the smallpox epidemic of 1841-1843, but it was widespread at the end of the civil war period. The largest clan is the Tin Ferrest clan, with 1326 members. They are the clan of the royal Ferrestan family, and thus have not split much in their history. During the civil war period, they split into three groups, reaching upwards of five at some points, but the clan reunified at the end of that period. The smallest clan is clan Tin Kumelto, which numbers at about 42. Ignoring outliers, the average size for a clan is 367.2 members, with about 300 living in Ferrest with the rest of the clan. There are 38 clans in all.

Clans are typically governed by a combination of a governing council, the Inwa, the general assembly, the wofit, and the chief or headman, the arna (also known as a rana in some areas). The Wofit is composed of all members of the clan who have completed the rite of passage into adulthood. They are responsible for choosing members to be a part of the Inwa, for approving or disapproving of projects proposed by the Inwa, and for deciding whether or not the clan should engage in warfare. The Wofit can, with a heavy majority, revoke a judgement passed by the Inwa, and with an even heavier majority, remove someone from the Inwa or replace the Arna. Members of the Inwa and the Arna remain a part of the Wofit, and have 3 votes in the Wofit. Everyone else only has one vote. The Inwa is comprised of the Wisest or most experienced members of the clan. They propose building projects, decide when and how to migrate, when to sow crops, when to send herds to the high mountains, and propose aggressive action against outside groups. They also function as a court, they listen to complaints and pass judgements. These judgements can sometimes be appealable at the court of the king. The Inwa’s job is to make wise decisions in the interests of the clan’s survival, and to maintain internal unity. They choose whether the clan should merge or split, and can even propose the clan adopt a family or a member of another group. This is uncommon but not exactly a rare practice. The Inwa also selects officials to guide certain tasks, such as the distribution of commonly held resources, the building or maintenance of fields, or other things. They also are responsible for electing the Arna. The Arna is chosen from among the clan for prowess and intelligence in battle and other high stress situations. The Arna is usually a man, but in some rare cases a woman is chosen. The office or Arna can be semi hereditary. The Arna is responsible for making decisions in battle, commanding the clan in battle, maintaining the clan’s battle readiness, and representing the clan to the outside. The Arna is charged with overseeing actions the Inwa chooses to ensure they run with and with running things day to day, but they will often delegate this to one or more caftês. The Arna is granted a seat on the Inwa, and will hold his position until they become too unpopular or too old to fulfil their duties.

Clans do not hold all things in common. Typically, only the grain is taken into a community storehouse. Other than that, community building projects, like mines, mills, and ships are also held communally. Also, the clan almost always holds an amount of weapons in common. Members of the clan own their own flocks and herds, tools, and the things they make. However, they share these things readily, for if they are seen as too greedy, they will be looked down on by the community and may face disciplinary action. Clan members are free to leave as they please, but if they are seen as abandoning their kin in their hour of need, when they come back they will not be looked kindly upon. Members can be exiled or disowned for serious offenses.

The tribe of Ferrest is ruled by a king, who is elected by a representative of each clan from the royal family. Historically, the king’s power derived from a standing military force, but in modern times it derives from control of the Cernit Regional Airport, and the Mabrilu Pass, through which the road that connects the interior of Ferrest with the rest of the world passes. The road runs from Cernit, through a pass in the Henko Somren, to Ferrest, a town on the sea originally established by the Mamkoslavs in the mid 1200s. The job of the king, and his officials and courts, is to keep the peace and the balance of power between clans. The King and his court judge disputes between clans, and complaints that clans cannot deal with themselves.The king enforces this through a standing army, and may either attack, arrest, or prevent from using the airport or the highway those who cross his will. This is technically an illegal paramilitary force, but there is a tacit agreement with the Srokeskian government that as long as it does not exceed 200 strong, operates only within recognized Ferrestan lands, and does not become a nuisance, they will be allowed to remain in operation. The office of king has been *de facto* hereditary since 1874, but is still legally an elected position.

Ferrestans do not all follow the same religion. Even within a single clan, there can be followers of different beliefs found living side by side, and there can be an amount of syncretism. But within Ferrest, there are three main religions. Lenošten Traditional Beliefs, Orthodox Christianity, and various varieties of Protestant Christianity. Lenošten Traditional Beliefs revolve around the belief in a single creator god, who made the entire universe but was disgusted by its turn to evil and kind of just checked out to rest somewhere, leaving the cosmos a battleground between various spirits and creatures, some good, some evil, some neutral. These spirits, at least the more powerful ones, are often seen as embodiments of various qualities of nature or of character, of the embodiment of a natural phenomenon. Some of these beings delight in chaos, some wish for a return of the creator, some are content with the way things are. Humans and other like beings, this belief system says, have a responsibility to live good lives with respect to all others, to demonstrate to the creator that there is something in the world worth coming back to. There exist within this religion many festivals to try and prove to the universe that the earth is not doomed to chaos, including, most interestingly, noise festivals, where Ferrestans try to make huge amounts of noise to make the presence of order, of people worth being taken care of, known to the cosmos. Orthodox Christianity first came to Ferrest with the arrival of the Mamkolsavs, shipwrecked slaves who arrived in the early medieval period. They were recently captured, being sent to a king in the Deccan as Mamluks, but a wild storm blew them far to the south. Some of them became preachers, teachers, and missionaries lived and traveled among the Ferrestans, and a sizable minority came to follow it. They built churches and monasteries in the mountains of Ferrest, and in the 1500s gained the favor of the king off and on, leading to the building of more and more beautiful christian architecture, even during the civil war. Even though they lost favor in the mid 1700s, their churches still remain and their numbers still remain a large plurality. Protestant, and amounts of Catholic Christianity were introduced during the days of exploration. Over the past 150 years, they have gone from being a very small part of the population to competing in numbers with traditional religions. In addition to this, there are some Muslim Ferrestans, and few Jewish ones.

Regardless of religion, all Ferrestans have the same rite of passage ceremony for adulthood. The youth is first questioned by the Inwa, either them all or just a member, on the history and other lore. Then the youth is asked to solve a few problems, to prove they are mentally capable of adulthood and possessing good judgement and ethics. Then, they must go into the forest, where they must hunt, kill, and bring back a deer. Then they are ceremonially made an adult. Usually, some other members of the clan will accompany the youth at a distance, so they can be rescued if things go awry. Even with this precaution, sometimes, people still die. The last time this happened was 2023, when Föhn winds brought in a cold front in late summer, and one teenager and another adult were trapped without shelter and lost their lives.

Marriage is seen to the Ferrestans as a bond as strong as birth. It is seen as a boundary or a fenced field, exclusively within which lie certain activities and behaviors, only to be entered by a couple, never to be left except in extraordinary circumstances. Marriage thus, is seen as the bond that ties you within that fenced field with another, and is a sacred thing meant to perpetuate the existence of the clan. Thus, homosexuality is not accepted in Ferrestan society, and is seen as dishonorable. It is not seen as a criminal act, but as a crossing of boundaries and a violation of something sacred. Marriage is not allowed with anyone descended from your great grandparents. If the couple is from two different clans, all the children the except the firstborn take the clan of the mother.

Gender roles in Ferrestan society are not set in stone, but rather general patterns. Men are typically involved in warfare, hunting, sailing, building, plowing, mining, and herding. Women are typically involved in childcare, baking, milling, sowing, and textile work. Both are involved in animal care in the winter, metalworking, harvest, carving, education, the arts, decision making, and crafts. These appear to have been chosen based on men’s perceived greater physical strength, and the fact that childbirth and early childcare renders women less mobile during that time of life. These remain mere generalities, and are by no means set in stone.

Ferrestans love music. Their music has been described as having a blues, rock, or bluegrass sound to it, but the music itself has been likened to jazz, classical, or blues, with somewhat African seeming rhythms. They play flutes, pipes, and two main types of string instrument, a bowed one called a kidjork, and a plucked one called a hantomar. There are many variations of them. Ferrestans like to layer harmonies and rhythms upon each other, and often an audience will drum on objects, hum, or even sing if they know the song and it is requested. Ferrestans value creativity and skill in such crafts, and bands of merchants will usually bring along some musicians to better endear themselves to the people. In addition, Ferrestans have adopted many western instruments into their playing. Their songs can be slow or fast, low or high, chants of old legends or stories, or smooth ballads. There is almost always an audience for innovation, and space to create within existing patterns. 

The earliest European explorers reported there being huge pipes that had to be carried on draft animals, used in battles. However, only fragmentary remains have been found, just offshore in the great lake near Cernit. It is likely that these were mostly destroyed in the period of civil war, or that the original reports were exaggerations.

Ferrestans make metal objects out of bronze, copper, iron, gold, and silver. They make tools, weapons, sometimes even armor, and adornments out of them. Ferrestans are known for their skill in making bronze, and in working silver. They are also known for their high quality wooden products, whether carvings, boats, spear shafts, or gun breaches. Commonly seen carvings or worked metal patterns include geometric shapes and patterns, plant foliage, stylized plant and animal life, or depictions of human events. Their goods of cedar bark are highly prized as well.

The Ferrestan writing system appears to have been modeled off of Greek letters. It is possible that they were modeled off of cyrilic instead, but more likely is that some of the merchants selling the ancestors of the Mamkoslavs were Byzantine, and kept some book of records or scripture on board. Elementary education usually takes place in the villages, but often, high schools are located only at larger or more central villages, or non Ferrestan towns. Parents will send their children to them for the week, or will send some members of the clan to travel with them to the high school, but often, they’re suspicious of sending their children outside of the influence of their clan. Sometimes, clan’s will hire a teacher to come to their village. Other times, they will send a clan member to go and get a degree in education. One of the most important aspects of early education is getting children comfortable in the decimal system, and the teaching of regional languages so outsiders can be communicated with. English is usually required, but sometimes Standard Srokeskian/Lenošten is required instead. Then, usually they have the option of learning Bengali, Lošjanky (the standardized dialect of the Mamkoslav language), South Srokeskian Creole, or Standard Srokeskian/Lenošten. Villages do not always have all these options available. Another important aspect of education is practical skills. Children must learn basic survival, basic self defense, how to use watercraft, running, swimming, hunting, taking care of animals and fields, basic craftsmanship, and other skills every Ferrestan should know. Later on, they can specialize their skills.

Ferrestans have weapons. Traditionally, they used spears, swords, axes, an interesting sort of polearm resembling a bladed hockey stick, clubs, spiked clubs, spear throwers, and bows. In modern times, they also make firearms, or trade for them. Ferrestans would traditionally make armor out of carved wood, leather, or metals, depending on what could be afforded. They are considered brave and canny warriors, who have very good woodcraft. Sometimes shark teeth are used to tip arrows or provide a blade or spike to something. Ferrestans engage in warfare with other clans or with neighboring peoples, such as the Dzemali, Makoslavs, Kose Karti, and the Gegumeniks. These engagements are usually small and involve some sort of dispute over fishing, hunting, or grazing rights. Sometimes there are just plain old raids or revenge raids, or battles seeking to drive another group away, but these are riskier and less common. Warfare is not as common as it used to be, firearms make it much riskier, there is less incentive to do it when times are good, and the Srokeskian government and the Ferrestan King are very opposed to inter and intra tribal warfare. Aside from warfare, there is much trade and alliances between Clans and other peoples. There is a good amount of intermarriage between clans, and some with other groups.
