During the expansion of the Lenošten in the 700s AD, the tribe of Ferrest, along with a smaller tribe called Kelmdri, migrated into the great valley known in modern times as Preohlednia. At that time, the inhabitants of the valley were few, and did not impede their arrival. The two Tribes at first tested and skirmished with each other, but agreed to ally with each other so that they could live in peace and in prosperity, and so that the smaller tribe would not be defeated. They lived like this for a generation or two, until the surrounding peoples began to put more pressure on them. Eventually, in either 822 or 823 AD, the pressure grew so great that the two tribes chose to abandon Preoblendia, and fled to the sea, where they built boats and sailed out to sea, planning to go to the great island of Djemajst, where they would be removed from the pressures of the mainland.

After arriving there, and a few short battles, an agreement was made that the two Hulurian tribes could inhabit a portion of land along the coast. Though the Ferrestans and Kelmdrians were happy with this arrangement, and the other agricultural peoples of the island valued their trade, the Dzemali were not. It is unclear how long the Dzemali plotted to drive them away, though both the Ferrestan and Dzemali oral histories say it was from the beginning, but what is certain is that the Ferrestans were warned of the incoming attack by Kose Karti, an agricultural polity who were skilled metalworkers and had many iron and tin deposits in their land. Thus, when the Dzemali did attack 84 years later, the Ferrestans were ready and defeated them soundly, along with the help of Kose Karti, some groups of Dzemali who sided with them, and a few other allies. According to the peace agreement, the Dzemali were not allowed to contest the building of a Ferrestan village anywhere south of the Brenna, could not take a king for themselves on the island of Djemajst, and were to grant equal sized hunting and fishing rights to any Ferrestans inhabiting the same valley as them. The Dzemali begrudgingly agreed, and a portion of them migrated to a southern island, known in Lanôstoje as Dĵemsejest, where they kept a king and prepared themselves for war. Some Dzemali joined their clans to the tribes of Ferrest or Kelmedri, and were absorbed into them. Seven contemporary Ferrestan clans trace ancestry to those Dzemali.

Since most of the villages in the original site of settlement had been destroyed, many Ferrestans chose to migrate into the mountains, and build villages there. Many were built on the shores of Swenlesk, and in the lower vales of the Brenna. Fresh rounds of war with the Dzemali destroyed most of the villages along the Brenna, both of the Ferrestans and the Brennabohu, who were the indigenous farmers of that place. They both fled, the Ferrestans chiefly to the west coast of the island, or to the Almandu ranges to the south. The Brennabohu fled along with the Ferrestans and mixed into them, or fled to Kose Karti, or to a few isolated places along the south and southwest coast. During the 1100s, a new round of wars, the same ones that caused the destruction of the Jure, led to the further disruption and upheaval in the population, and about this time, the Kelmdri mostly chose to move their clan’s allegiances to the King of Ferrest. Five or six clans are descended from them. In addition, the two remaining clans of the Kelmdri joined Ferrest later on. After this time, Mamkoslavs, first of the Goranky variety and later other groups, began building settlements along the coast. The town of Ferrest was founded in 1234, and would grow to become the chief port of the island, growing to a peak of culture, prosperity, and a population of over 5,000 inhabitants in the 1500s. In addition, Orthodox priests began to travel throughout the island, building churches and monasteries, and converting locals. To this day, over 20% of Ferrestans are practicing Eastern Orthodox, and many more claim the religion but have syncretic beliefs with the traditional religion.

During the late 1200s, a great war was being fought on the mainland, and Ferrest sent an army to assist. At this time, the Dzemali took notice of this weakness and overwhelmed the entire island, which was now generally known as Ferrest. This caused even more upheaval and destruction, and it was only after the army returned in 1267, one and a half years later, that the Ferrestans were able to rebuild. Kose Karti assisted in this effort, and in return, an eternal oath of friendship was sworn between their two nations, though their clans would continue to war at times. An interesting result of this event, known as the Great Dzemali War, was the migration of a group of Ferrestans to the Island of Mêstojest. They were fleeing by ship from a destroyed town on the coast, but found themselves unable to flee to anywhere else and chose to head off in search of Mêstojest. Mêstojest had never been inhabited, but it had been sighted by fishermen on occasion. The Ferrestans on this island have never been contacted by the outside world, but they do appear to maintain contact with their kin on Ferrest.

Things on Ferrest remained relatively stable for several generations. There was tribal warfare between clans, wars with the Dzemali, and other unfortunate events, but no grand upheavals. Later, in the early 1540s, a Portuguese vessel got blown off course and found itself on the north coast of Ferrest. The ship was captured by the Ferrestans, and was held at the town of Ferrest over the winter. When the passes through the mountains became passable, the crew was taken to Cernit, where the Ferrestan leadership agreed to find them a navigator to help them reach India, and to send a representative along to create a trade deal. It took several years before a navigator was found, a Bengali mariner from Brubhisa (Brobisk is the original, Lošjanky name of the city). This was the first contact between Europe and Srokeskia, though the north coast had been sighted by a Spanish Galleon about twenty years prior. The reports written by these first European explorers have proven to be an invaluable source on prewar Ferrest. Portuguese priests established a mission on Ferrest in 1554, but it would be largely abandoned in the 1560s, and Catholic missionary efforts mostly moved to Preohlednia.

In the early 1560s, when several kings of Ferrest died in quick succession. This led to a lack of a clear heir, and a great disagreement over who should receive that title came into being. Clans were divided against each other, and a long period of civil war and conflict began. Though it was the lack of a clear successor to the throne that sparked the war, the underlying tensions between clans had been laid long before that time. The war also wound up involving opportunistic Dzemali, who would act on their own or in conjunction with one or more of the factions of the war. It was during this war that Ferrest was burned and its golden age ended, and Cernit was temporarily abandoned. It was also during this time that some Ferrestans migrated to the Probotjan mountains, and to some of the islands of the west coast of Ferrest. Many Ferrestans took to piracy at this time, which added to the perception of Lenošten as fierce pirates. Groups of busted Ferrestan pirates led to the establishment of some small Ferrestan populations around the Indian Ocean, most notably Ferrestan settlement in the Sundarbans established in 1671. This civil war continued until everyone was too tired to fight anymore, and tacitly agreed to peace and to recognize the same king. By that time, most of the infrastructure, the villages, bridges, and fortresses, had been destroyed, and had to be rebuilt. It was during this Civil War period that the Dzemali began to settle down and practice agriculture on a wider scale than they had previously.

Over the following century, Ferrest was rebuilt. There was trade with the rest of Srokeskia, with the Spanish and Dutch, who had established small trading colonies on the mainland, and with other European merchants. Ferrest did not involve itself with wars on the mainland, but mercenaries from Ferrest were considered very valuable during this time. Most trade was conducted through a rebuilt city of Ferrest, and through Cernit. Rural Ferrest remained quite isolated through this time. In fact, some Ferrestans in the Almandu and in Southern Ferrest were not contacted by the outside world until the late 20th century, and it is believed there still might be some groups isolated within the mountains who have not yet made contact with civilization.

Between 1807 and 1811, Ferrest was involved in another war with the Dzemali. This war caused a good deal of destruction along the Southern coast, but in the end Ferrest was victorious and the mostly accepted Ferrestan overlordship. In 1849, France attempted to make Ferrest its protectorate. They successfully seized the Ferrest (the city) but were repulsed from making any further gains. Eventually, in 1853, France moved its Srokeskian base of operations elsewhere, and left behind a decent amount of equipment, which helped the Ferrestans to improve their firearms technology. Later on, in 1857, Ferrest got involved in the Second Enderby War. A population of European settlers in Preohlednia, who had gained the right to live there in the First Enderby War, had declared independence from the kingdom of Lošia, who technically ruled that land. The powers within Srokeskia all lined themselves up in support or in opposition to this. Ferrest was on the side against. By all accounts, their soldiers fought excellently in the war, and their equipment was reliable. However, poor strategy, tactics, and organization on the Anti- Independence side lead to the Ferrestan force losing 40% casualties in the crucial battle, and their cause lost the war. The Republic of Antia gained sovereignty, and would eventually exert power over a large part of Srokeskia.

During the various wars of the later 1800s, with various Srokeskian and European powers competing over Srokeskia, Ferrest sent out small expeditionary forces to the mainland. Trade suffered in this period, and the quality of life and technological sophistication decreased. Epidemics, war, and other factors caused the population to drop by 20% from 1870-1900. However, in this period protestant missionaries and doctors began to filter into Ferrest. Many of these early groups came from Britain and the United States, but missionaries from the rest of Europe and from Australia came as well. As much as 60% of Ferrestans may have been Protestant christians, at least in name, by 1910, but in the modern day the number is about 44%.

During the interwar period, Antia began to expand. Ferrest, in its weakened state, found it hard to defend itself, and came nominally under the control of Antia. However, portions of the interior remained wild and uncontrolled, and constant low level warfare took place. In 1936, a large-scale revolt started on the east side, the coastal side, of Henko Somren. This was the center of Antian authority in Ferrest. The rebellion spread to other parts of Srokeskia under the control of Antia, and before long, large portions of the land were up in arms. Antia completely lost control of Ferrest, except for a sliver of land around the town of Ferrest. In the face of these challenges, Antia appealed for help from the Empire of Japan, who in 1941 sent 25,000 soldiers to take over Srokeskia. Antia appears to have offered raw materials, such as wood and metal, and a settlement zone for the Japanese. The resulting war caused widespread death and destruction, but only reached the interior of Ferrest in the form of air raids. The more accessible portions of Ferrest, however, suffered heavily and much of the civilian population fled. Eventually, with British and Australian support, the Srokeskians were able to drive out the Japanese and occupied Antia. In the following years, Srokeskia came under the rule of a provisional government, headed by some of the leaders of the resistance. This government was rather ineffective, torn by lingering tribal and political divides. Then, in mid 1953, a portion of the military overthrew the provisional government and proclaimed the People’s Marxian Socialist Republic of Srokeskia. Thus, Srokeskia came under communist control.

The Ferrestans at this point mostly didn’t care. They didn’t believe this government could affect them much at all, and they figured life would simply continue on as normal. Unfortunately for them, the government ordered the Surge into the Future in 1955, planning to forcefully modernize Srokeskia, Ferrest included. A part of this plan was to transition agriculture into collective farms, which the Ferrestans really did not want to do. Another part of this plan was to move a portion of the people in the countryside into new cities where they would operate industry. This also the Ferrestans really did not want to do. So they sent their king at the time, Tafde III, to appeal this decision. His request was denied, and he was sent to a labor camp for the crimes of reactionary dissent and exploitation of the proletariat. At this, the Ferrestans revolted.

Many Ferrestans were forcibly moved onto farms or to new development in cities. Often this was to the city of Ferrest, but quite often they were scattered across Srokeskia, in an attempt to keep them from conspiring with each other or maintaining tribal and clan loyalties. However, the insurgency in the mountains continued throughout the communist regime, until it fell to a popular revolution in 1984. This was not immediate though, and a civil war between the communists and the new government lasted until 1989, and it wasn’t until 1995 that the last communist forces surrendered.

The new, democratic government of Srokeskia immediately began the slow transfer of people from the collective farms to their former homes, or transitioning the farms themselves from collective to being split between the various farmers that had once inhabited them. This process was gone through slowly and carefully, so as not to disrupt the production of food, but by 1987 all Ferrestans who wished to return home had done so. Many Ferrestans still chose to stay in towns or cities across Srokeskia, many had started families with those of other groups, and many could not find work back in the villages in the mountains. Finally, after all that violence, isolation, and hardship, Ferrest was at peace.
