The Indigenous peoples of Srokeskia are divided into four cultural regions. Highland, Eastern, Northern, and Western Fringe. The borders of the Highland region are usually defined as the parts of the country inhabited by Hulurian Tribes, but a couple of other groups are lumped in with them due to a similar culture. The Eastern region is defined as the land to the east of the Porbotjan Mountains that separate the central plateau from the coastal regions to the east. The Northern region is commonly delineated as anything to the north of the Enderby Forth that isn’t inhabited by Hulurian tribes, but some groups within that region share more in common with the Highland culture than to their neighbors. The Western Fringe is considered the islands just to the west of Huluria, but in practice most of that land is coinhabited if not solely inhabited by Hulurian tribes.

The Highland includes the entirety of the central plateaus, and the central and southern portions of the western Cordillera. The inhabitants of this region are chiefly the Lenošten, which is the endonym for the Hulurians. They expanded very rapidly in the 700s or so, following a period of upheaval and depopulation, and absorbed much of the existing population. Also within this region are the Kiringi, the Ulbi Vorosa, Kastromtẽ, and few other small tribes. Most of the people in this region practice animal husbandry, especially in the plateau. Agriculture is also practiced, often in more mountainous regions or along rivers. The chief defining feature of this region is the clan governance system, including both the way clans function internally and interact with each other. Many cultural practices, expectations and taboos are common across the region. In addition there seems to be a common cultural mindset, that nothing is permanent and that every day of continued stability and survival riquires sacrifice.

The Eastern region is a narrow coastal region of valleys, plains, hills, and highlands, between the Porbotjan Mountains and the sea. It is an ancient agricultural region, where empires and kingdoms and cities all rose and fell. Now, the land is less populous and prosperous than it once was, and in the modern era much of it, especially central and south central regions, are chiefly inhabited by a newcoming people, Bengali and other South Asian settlers who first arrived at the end of the 15th century. In the southern regions the slavic Lošjanky are the chief inhabitants. The indigenous culture of the region mostly descends from, or is heavily influenced by, the Jure culture. They were a strong, city building civilization that reached their greatest extent during the first century BC, but survived up until the early 11th century. The people in this region are agriculturists, they are proud of their culture and fiercely defensive of their homes and traditions, and typically have a bit of a superiority complex for their culture and history.

The Northern region is the most culturally diverse. It was the original cradle of agriculture, and has the largest remaining agricultural towns and villages. It was influenced by the Jure, and ruled by the for a time, but was not closely enough linked by it to be as affected by their demise and the wars surrounding them as the Eastern region was. In addition, the Northern region has plenty of hunter-gatherer groups. Their region is characterized by complex politics between villages, tribes, polities, and towns, and by shared agricultural practices. Some groups on the western Fringe, especially on Ferrest, are very culturally similar to the Northern Region.

The Western Fringe are the people who lived along the mountainous west coast of Srokeskia before the migrations of Hulurian peoples. Their main representatives in the modern era are the Dzemali peoples, a group of people with similar cultures and languages and a strong national identity. They often live in small wandering hunter gatherer bands, but over the past several hundred years have been transitioning to an agricultural lifestyle. They are rather warlike, and often fight against the Hulurians, who they usually see as enemies and conquerors. More pragmatic Dzemali groups align themselves with or mix with them, seeing it as the way to a better life for themselves and for their survival.
